# Quorum sensing communication between bacteria and human cells: signals,
targets, and functions

Division of Medical Microbiology, Department of Clinical and Experimental
Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, Linkoping University, Linkoping, Sweden

Edited by: _Adam Schikora, Justus Liebig University Giessen, Germany_

Reviewed by: _Leighton Pritchard, James Hutton Institute, UK; Vittorio
Venturi, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology,
Italy_

*Correspondence: _Elena Vikstrom, Division of Medical Microbiology, Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, Linkoping University, Linkoping SE-58185, Sweden e-mail: [es.uil@mortskiv.anele](mailto:dev@null)_

This article was submitted to Plant-Microbe Interaction, a section of the
journal Frontiers in Plant Science.

[Author information
►](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=classic)
[Article notes
►](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=classic)
[Copyright and License information
►](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=classic)

Received April 30, 2014; Accepted June 10, 2014.

Both direct and long-range interactions between pathogenic _Pseudomonas
aeruginosa_ bacteria and their eukaryotic hosts are important in the outcome
of infections. For cell-to-cell communication, these bacteria employ the
quorum sensing (QS) system to pass on information of the density of the
bacterial population and collectively switch on virulence factor production,
biofilm formation, and resistance development. Thus, QS allows bacteria to
behave as a community to perform tasks which would be impossible for
individual cells, e.g., to overcome defense and immune systems and establish
infections in higher organisms. This review highlights these aspects of QS and
our own recent research on how _P. aeruginosa_ communicates with human cells
using the small QS signal molecules _N_-acyl homoserine lactones (AHL). We
focus on how this conversation changes the behavior and function of
neutrophils, macrophages, and epithelial cells and on how the signaling
machinery in human cells responsible for the recognition of AHL. Understanding
the bacteria-host relationships at both cellular and molecular levels is
essential for the identification of new targets and for the development of
novel strategies to fight bacterial infections in the future.

**Keywords: **bacteria-host cell interaction, quorum sensing, _Pseudomonas aeruginosa_, _N_-acyl homoserine lactones, epithelial cells, innate immune cells, neutrophils, macrophages

_Pseudomonas aeruginosa_ is an environmentally highly adaptable Gram-negative
bacterium that infects different host species, including higher plants,
invertebrates, and vertebrates. In humans, it elicits acute and chronic
infections, typically in critically ill patients having compromised epithelial
barriers and immune system or the genetic disorder cystic fibrosis. The
outcome of infections and establishment of disease depends on both host
defence and bacterial capacities. The latter include its autonomic efficiency
to grow, divide, and adapt to the environment, and the ability to sense, and
communicate with their neighbors in the population to accomplish cooperative
activities, e.g., biofilm formation and production of virulence factors. To do
this, _P. aeruginosa_ uses a mechanisms of cell-to-cell communication called
quorum sensing (QS). It allows the bacteria to recognize the population
density by sensing and measuring the accumulation of specific small signal
molecules that members of the community secrete. When the population density
is high, the amount of accumulated signals in the environment is accordingly
sufficient to activate signaling pathways that alter bacterial gene expression
and activate cooperative responses ([Rutherford and Bassler, 2012](http://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=classic#B60); [Schuster et
al., 2013](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=classic
#B63); [Fazli et al., 2014](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC407181
8/?report=classic#B19)).

Being equipped with a relatively large genome,_ P. aeruginosa_ harbors three
distinct but subordinated QS systems: two of LuxI/LuxR-type and a third called
the _Pseudomonas_ quinolone signal (PQS) system. The two LuxI/LuxR-type
systems are _N_-acylhomoserine lactone (AHL) dependent. In the first, the LuxI
homolog LasI produces a freely diffusible_ N_-3-oxo-dodecanoyl-L-homoserine
lactone (3O-C12-HSL) that is detected by the LuxR homolog cytoplasmic receptor
LasR ([More et al., 1996](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/
?report=classic#B49); [Parsek et al., 1999](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/ar
ticles/PMC4071818/?report=classic#B55)). In the second, the LuxI homolog RhlI
synthesizes another AHL,_ N_-butyryl-L-homoserine lactone (C4-HSL) that binds
to the cytoplasmic receptor RhlR ([Ochsner et al., 1994](http://www.ncbi.nlm.n
ih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=classic#B52); [Pearson et al., 1995](ht
tp://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=classic#B56)); LasR
and RhlR are cognate transcriptional regulators. Together, the AHL-LuxR
complexes of both circuits control the activation of more than 300 genes in
the _P. aeruginosa_ genome. Many of these genes code for production of
extracellular products that may be considered as virulence factors, because
they can damage host tissues and promote infection, and inflammation. These
virulence factors include exotoxin A, elastase, proteases, pyocyanin, lectins,
and toxins ([Gambello and Iglewski, 1991](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/arti
cles/PMC4071818/?report=classic#B21); [Toder et al., 1991](http://www.ncbi.nlm
.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=classic#B72); [Gambello et al., 1993]
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=classic#B22);
[Schuster et al., 2003](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?r
eport=classic#B62)). _P. aeruginosa_ uses the third PQS system to control
cooperative responses and gene expression of rhamnolipid, a critical
biosurfactant in the late stage of biofilm formation ([Ochsner et al., 1994](h
ttp://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=classic#B52); [de
Kievit, 2009](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=clas
sic#B13)). The signal molecules of this system are bicyclic compounds,
2-alkyl-4(1H)-quinolones (PQS), produced by PqsABCDH and recognized by the
receptor PqsR ([Deziel et al., 2004](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC4071818/?report=classic#B14); [Diggle et al., 2007](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih
.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=classic#B15)). Several of PQS can act not
only as a QS signals, but also possess antimicrobial, anticancer, or
antiallergenic activities. Together with periplasmic components, outer
membrane proteins, phospholipids, toxins, lipopolysaccharide (LPS), and DNA,
PQS are typically packed into spherical 50-250 nm membrane vesicles that _P.
aeruginosa_ secrete and deliver to the environment. In this way, vesicles have
a role in communication and competion in microbial communities and with host
cells ([Heeb et al., 2011](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818
/?report=classic#B26); [Tashiro et al., 2013](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/
articles/PMC4071818/?report=classic#B70)). In other cases, _P. aeruginosa_ can
directly convey its products to other cells using the type VI secretion
system. In addition, bacteria possesses an intracellular orphan receptor QscR,
a LuxR homolog ([Lintz et al., 2011](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC4071818/?report=classic#B46)) that can bind to 3O-C12-HSL ([Oinuma and
Greenberg, 2011](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=c
lassic#B53)). This natural target forms dimers with other receptors, i.e.,
LasR and RhlR, making them inactive and thereby repressing LasRI- and RhlRI-
dependent genes leading to prevention of aberrant QS responses before the
bacteria reach a quorum in a community ([Ledgham et al., 2003](http://www.ncbi
.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=classic#B45)). Furthermore, the
LasR-3O-C12-HSL, RhlR-C4-HSL, and PQS-PqsR complexes target the regulation of
_lasI, rhlI, pqsH,_ and _pqsR,_ which creates an autoinducing feed-forward
loop and establishes the tightness and subordination between all three QS
systems ([Seed et al., 1995](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC40718
18/?report=classic#B64); [Latifi et al., 1996](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc
/articles/PMC4071818/?report=classic#B44); [Deziel et al., 2004](http://www.nc
bi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=classic#B14); [Xiao et al., 200
6](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=classic#B84);
[Diggle et al., 2007](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?rep
ort=classic#B15)). Thus, with optimal precision _P. aeruginosa_ QS system
directly or indirectly controls the expression of more than 10% of genes for
multiple virulence factors, secondary metabolites, swarming motility, and
biofilm development ([Schuster and Greenberg, 2006](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.go
v/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=classic#B61); [Wagner and Iglewski, 2008](ht
tp://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=classic#B80);
[Williams and Camara, 2009](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC407181
8/?report=classic#B83)).

Prokaryotes and eukaryotes have coexisted for many years, during which time
they have been exposed to the signals produced and released by the other. The
organisms of two kingdoms have also learnt to sense their various molecules
including QS signals to influence gene expression and behavior in a process
called inter-kingdom signaling ([Pacheco and Sperandio, 2009](http://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=classic#B54); [Gonzalez and
Venturi, 2013](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=cla
ssic#B25)).

The QS signal molecule AHL affects mammalian host cells and its signaling
pathways; this was shown using both _in vivo_ and _in vitro_ models for immune
cells, fibroblasts, and epithelial cells. For the biological activity of AHL,
a long acyl chain with more than 10 C-atoms, an intact homoserine lactone
ring, and oxo- or hydroxyl substitutions are important. AHL triggers and acts
through multiple signaling pathways, e.g., calcium mobilization, activation of
Rho GTPases, MAPK, and NFκB that control diverse functions and behaviors in
host cells, like cytoskeleton remodeling, chemotaxis, migration, phagocytosis,
epithelial barrier function, differentiation, proliferation, apoptosis, and
production of immune mediators. This topic has been thoroughly investigated by
many research groups during the last decade and extensively reviewed recently
([Williams and Camara, 2009](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC40718
18/?report=classic#B83); [Jarosz et al., 2011](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc
/articles/PMC4071818/?report=classic#B32); [Teplitski et al., 2011](http://www
.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=classic#B71)).

Many organisms, including bacteria, fungi, plants, and mammalian can disturb
and inactivate AHL by enzymes in a way called quorum quenching ([Czajkowski
and Jafra, 2009](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=c
lassic#B11); [Chen et al., 2013](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4
071818/?report=classic#B8)). Humans have also developed an ability to destroy
AHL via a class of quorum quenching enzymes called paraoxonases ([Amara et
al., 2011](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=classic
#B1)).

Here, we will further focus on mostly our research on how bacterial QS
conversation changes the behavior and function of human neutrophils,
macrophages, and epithelial cells, and the signaling responsible for the
recognition of AHL.

Epithelial cells are positioned strategically to provide both physical and
immune barriers to pathogens and other environmental agents. The physical
barrier is created by epithelial cell-to-cell junctions that prevent for
instance invasion of pathogens and food constituents. The junctions are
multiprotein associations of transmembrane proteins connected to cytoplasmic
plaque proteins and the actin cytoskeleton ([Van Itallie and Anderson, 2004](h
ttp://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=classic#B73);
[Balda and Matter,
2008](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=classic#B2);
[Furuse, 2010](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=cla
ssic#B20); [Ivanov et al., 2010](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4
071818/?report=classic#B28); [Capaldo et al., 2014](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.go
v/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=classic#B7)). In a model of polarized
epithelial cells, 3O-C12-HSL alters their barrier integrity (**Figure
[​1](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/figure/F1/)**), as
evidenced by decreased transepithelial electrical resistance and increased
paracellular flux of different-sized dextrans ([Vikstrom et al., 2006](http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=classic#B79)). The cell
junction complexes occludin-ZO-1, JAM-ZO-1 and E-cadherin-β-catenin were
disrupted and the expression and distribution of proteins were affected
([Vikstrom et al., 2006](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?
report=classic#B79), [2009](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC407181
8/?report=classic#B76), [2010](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC407
1818/?report=classic#B77)). Some junctional cytoplasmic proteins play a
scaffolding role in linking the actin cytoskeleton and helping to recruit an
array of signaling pathways, for example the MAPK cascade molecules, protein
kinases, and protein phosphatases ([Balda and Matter,
2009](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=classic#B3);
[Rodgers and Fanning, 2011](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC407181
8/?report=classic#B59)). Both p38 and p42/44 MAPK are involved in the 3O-C12
-HSL-induced leaky barrier ([Vikstrom et al., 2006](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.go
v/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=classic#B79)). Moreover, the disrupted cell
junction associations and enhanced paracellular permeability are paralleled by
alterations in the phosphorylation status of TJ and AJ proteins (**Figure
[​1](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/figure/F1/)**;
[Vikstrom et al., 2009](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?r
eport=classic#B76), [2010](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818
/?report=classic#B77)). Ca2+ is another important component in the regulating
of immune and physical barriers of the epithelium. Mucosal epithelial cells
are as other cells, equipped with Ca2+-dependent signaling which allows them
to initiate immune response to bacteria and their products. The participation
of Ca2+ as a second messenger is thus vital to many physiological processes of
the epithelia including response to bacteria ([Vandenbroucke et al., 2008](htt
p://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=classic#B74);
[Varani, 2011](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=cla
ssic#B75)). 3O-C12-HSL can mobilize intracellular calcium through influx from
surrounding and release from thapsigargin-sensitive stores via inositol
1,4,5-triphosphate receptors, IP3R (**Figure
[​1](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/figure/F1/)**;
[Vikstrom et al., 2010](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?r
eport=classic#B77)). These receptors are based in the endoplasmatic reticulum
(ER) and regulated by their messengers IP3 ([Ivanova et al., 2014](http://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=classic#B29)). Together with
ER, the actin cytoskeleton is also critically involved in Ca2+ storage and
release as well as in the regulation of store-coupled Ca2+ entry ([Lange and
Gartzke, 2006](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=cla
ssic#B42)).

Establishing and contributing to both physical and immune barriers, the
epithelial cells also have to be constantly renewed and prepared to move.
After injury, caused by for example oxidative stress, inflammation and
infection, the epithelium undergo a wound-healing process. This is dependent
on the balance of migration, proliferation, and differentiation of the cells
within the wound area ([Sturm and Dignass, 2008](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/p
mc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=classic#B68)). Restitution of the epithelium
requires extensive reorganization of the cytoskeleton and cellular junctions,
regulated by the Rho family of small GTPases, like Rho, Rac, and Cdc42
([Kjoller and Hall, 1999](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/
?report=classic#B38); [Evers et al., 2000](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/art
icles/PMC4071818/?report=classic#B18)). 3O-C12-HSL modulates epithelial cell
migration in a dose- and time-dependent manner ([Karlsson et al., 2012b](http:
//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=classic#B37)) inducing
remodeling of cytoskeletal actin ([Vikstrom et al., 2006](http://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=classic#B79)). The upstream effectors
of this, and thereby regulators of cell shape and motility are the previously
mentioned Rho family GTPases Rac1 and Cdc42. The Rho GTPases cycle between an
active and inactive status by binding GTP and by hydrolysis of GTP to GDP,
acting as molecular "on-off" switch ([Wennerberg and Der, 2004](http://www.ncb
i.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=classic#B82)). The signaling can
also be modulated by their phosphorylation state via AKT1 kinase ([Kwon et
al., 2000](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=classic
#B41)). Together with the effect of 3O-C12-HSL on cell migration, low doses of
3O-C12-HSL over shorter time spans initiated phosphorylation of Rac1/Cdc42,
whereas high concentrations rapidly decrease the level of phosphorylated
Rac/Cdc42 ([Karlsson et al., 2012b](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/P
MC4071818/?report=classic#B37)). Taken together, 3O-C12-HSL can alter barrier
functions and migration in epithelial cells (**Figure
[​1](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/figure/F1/)**).

The immune barrier of epithelial cells is potentiated through detection of
antigens and rapid signaling to recruit phagocytes to the site of infection
and tissue damage. They paracellulary transmigrate across the epithelium, and
cell junction protein JAM mediate this process as it is also receptor for
leukocyte integrins ([Zen and Parkos, 2003](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/ar
ticles/PMC4071818/?report=classic#B85)). Phagocytes, like neutrophils and
macrophages, are key players in the innate immune defenses, providing
protection from invading bacteria and tissue damage. Bacterial QS conversation
may change their behavior and function and the signaling responsible for the
sensing of AHL.

Neutrophils are small and rapidly moving phagocytes with a short life span in
circulation, always appearing at the early onset of infection. They sense the
bacteria very well, which gives them a head start in controlling inflammation,
infection, and biofilm formation. Following activation by bacterial products
or immune stimuli, they execute specialized functions of chemotaxis,
phagocytosis, and generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS). 3-oxo-C12-HSL
and 3-oxo-C10-HSL, but not C4-HSL, can act as a strong chemoattractants for
human neutrophils and induce their migration to the site of AHL in a dose-
dependent manner ([Zimmermann et al., 2006](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/ar
ticles/PMC4071818/?report=classic#B86); [Karlsson et al., 2012a](http://www.nc
bi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=classic#B36)). This put long
chain AHL in a position among potent _bona fide_ chemoattractants, such as
chemokines, cytokines (IL-8 and GM-CSF), leukotriene B4, platelet activating
factor, products from bacteria (formylated peptides and LPS), signals from
dying cells (such as TNF-α), although higher molar concentrations of AHL were
required (**Figure
[​2A](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/figure/F2/)**).
Chemotaxis and migration towards AHL are paralleled by cytoskeletal F-actin
accumulation in the leading edge of neutrophils, by increased F-actin-
to-G-actin ratio and via activation of Rho GTPases Rac1 and Cdc42 ([Karlsson
et al., 2012a](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=cla
ssic#B36)). Rac1 regulates the formation of lamellipodia protrusions and
membrane ruffles, and Cdc42 triggers filopodial extensions ([Kjoller and Hall,
1999](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=classic#B38)
; [Evers et al., 2000](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?re
port=classic#B18)). Two long acyl chain AHL with 10 and 12 C-atoms activated
phospholipase Cγ1 and mobilized intracellular calcium via the IP3R at
endoplasmic reticulum, whereas an AHL with a short acyl chain failed to do
this ([Karlsson et al., 2012a](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC407
1818/?report=classic#B36); **Figure
[​2A](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/figure/F2/)**).
Thus, recognition of AHL QS signals by neutrophils may play a critical role in
their recruitment during infections and early stage of biofilm formation.

Other important players in the innate immune system are macrophages, cells
differentiated from monocytes in tissues and stimulated by neutrophils to come
to the site of infection after them. Macrophages harbor the characteristics of
innate immune cells and traits that initiate mechanisms of adaptive immunity.
In response to microbial antigens, they can display strong phagocytic
activity, generation of "killer" anti-microbial ROS, NO, "tissue repair"
ornithine, pro-inflammatory cytokines stimulating other immune cells to
respond to pathogens. In a macrophage phagocytosis model with _Saccharomyces
cerevisiae_ as preys, 3O-C12-HSL increased phagocytic capacity via the p38,
but not the p42/44 MAPK signaling pathway (**Figure
[​2B](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/figure/F2/)**). It
had no influence on macrophages oxidative metabolism, the level of ROS or
production of cytokines ([Vikstrom et al., 2005](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/p
mc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=classic#B78)). In _P. aeruginosa_, two
functional QS genes, _lasI,_ and_ rhlI_, which are responsible for synthesis
of signal molecules 3O-C12-HSL and C4-HSL strongly contribute to effective
macrophage phagocytosis of this pathogen. AQP9 controls cell migration by
accumulation in membrane protrusions and domains preceding their expansions
([Karlsson et al., 2011](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?
report=classic#B35), [2013a](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC40718
18/?report=classic#B33),
[b](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=classic#B34)).
This trigger actin cytoskeleton to be remodeled and further regulate
macrophage shape, migration, and phagocytosis of microorganisms (**Figure
[​2D](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/figure/F2/)**).
3O-C12-HSL caused a rapid and prolonged cell-volume increase controlled by
AQP9 in human macrophages (**Figure
[​2C](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/figure/F2/)**),
which can be a danger signal and protection mechanism ([Hoffmann et al., 2009]
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=classic#B27);
[Compan et al., 2012](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?rep
ort=classic#B9)). AQP9 is involved in _Escherichia coli_ LPS-enhanced brain
water content and blood-brain barrier permeability ([Wang et al., 2009](http:/
/www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=classic#B81)) and has
been identified as a one of markers of chronic inflammation in patients with
psoriasis, rheumatoid arthritis, and inflammatory bowel disease ([Mesko et
al., 2010](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=classic
#B48)).

Identifying targets for AHL allows better understanding of QS communication
during host-bacteria interactions. The recognition of 3O-C12-HSL by mammalian
cells probably does not rely on pattern-recognition receptors (PRRs) that
usually sense invariant microbial motifs (PAMPs, pathogen-associated molecular
patterns) present on or shed from bacteria (LPS, lipoteichoic acid, flagellin,
and DNA). The canonical class of PRRs, the membrane-bound toll-like receptors
(TLRs) located on immune cells, do not interact with 3O-C12-HSL ([Kravchenko
et al., 2006](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=clas
sic#B40)). Still, as for TLR activation, AHL can trigger and act through
multiple signaling pathways, which include calcium signaling, activation of
Rho GTPases, MAPK, and transcription factor NFκB that control expression of
pro-inflammatory mediators, cytokines, chemokines, enzymes, and interferones
([Smith et al., 2002](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?rep
ort=classic#B67); [Shiner et al., 2006](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articl
es/PMC4071818/?report=classic#B66); [Kravchenko et al., 2008](http://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=classic#B39); [Mayer et al., 2011]
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=classic#B47);
[Karlsson et al., 2012a](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?
report=classic#B36); [Glucksam-Galnoy et al., 2013](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.go
v/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=classic#B24)). These mediators are involved
in the coordination of innate immune response and recruit effector cells of
the adaptive immune system to the site of the infection to combat the invading
bacteria.

During the recognition of 3O-C12-HSL by mammalian cells, this lipophilic
molecule with a long acyl chain and an intact homoserine lactone ring may
interact directly with phospholipids in model membrane systems and in T-cell
membranes ([Davis et al., 2010](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC40
71818/?report=classic#B12)). On entering host cells ([Shiner et al., 2004](htt
p://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=classic#B65);
[Ritchie et al., 2007](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?re
port=classic#B58)), 3O-C12-HSL can utilize intracellular nuclear peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptors (PPAR) to affect NF-κB signaling ([Jahoor et
al., 2008](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=classic
#B30); [Cooley et al., 2010](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC40718
18/?report=classic#B10)). The binding of 3O-C12-HSL to nuclear PPAR does not
exclude the existence of cell surface or membrane-associated receptors, which
after binding to 3O-C12-HSL likely help phosphorylate phospholipase C and
evoke an increase in intracellular calcium ([Shiner et al., 2006](http://www.n
cbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=classic#B66); [Davis et al., 2
010](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=classic#B12);
[Karlsson et al., 2012a](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?
report=classic#B36)).

Several groups have designed probes and affinity matrixes which could be
utilized to detect the mammalian target of 3O-C12-HSL ([Dubinsky et al., 2009]
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=classic#B17);
[Garner et al., 2011](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?rep
ort=classic#B23); [Praneenararat et al., 2011](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc
/articles/PMC4071818/?report=classic#B57); [Dubinsky et al., 2013](http://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=classic#B16)). Using a
biotin-based 3O-C12-HSL probe, LC-MS/MS, and super-resolution microscopy, the
IQ-motif-containing GTPase-activating protein IQGAP1 was identified as a
putative human target for 3O-C12-HSL in epithelial cells (**Figure
[​1](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/figure/F1/)**;
[Karlsson et al., 2012b](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?
report=classic#B37)). IQGAP1 contains multiple domains for binding other
proteins and localizes in the leading edge of migrating cells ([Briggs and
Sacks,
2003](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=classic#B6);
[Noritake et al., 2004](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?r
eport=classic#B50); [Bensenor et al., 2007](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/ar
ticles/PMC4071818/?report=classic#B4)). It directly interacts with and
stabilizes the Rho-family GTPases, Rac1, and Cdc42 in their GTP-bound state
([Swart-Mataraza et al., 2002](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC407
1818/?report=classic#B69); [Briggs and Sacks, 2003](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.go
v/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=classic#B6)), playing an essential role in
cell shape, vesicle trafficking, and directional migration ([Bensenor et al., 
2007](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=classic#B4))
. It likely mediates these processes through its other domains, linking it to
actin, myosin, β-catenin, E-cadherin, calmodulin, and MAPK ([Noritake et al., 
2005](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=classic#B51)
; [Brandt and Grosse, 2007](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC407181
8/?report=classic#B5)), which allows it to function as a true scaffolding
protein (**Figure
[​1](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/figure/F1/)**). The
interaction of 3O-C12-HSL with the cell membrane, diffusion and entering into
the cytoplasm, targeting of IQGAP1 and PPAR do not exclude each other. It has,
for example been shown that different types of lipids, such as chemoattractant
leukotriene B4, can bind to both the cell surface receptor LTB4, and nuclear
PPAR.

During the last decade of research remarkable insight has been gained into the
mechanisms of bacterial QS communication and that _P. aeruginosa_ 3O-C12-HSL
plays at least two distinct roles. Besides regulating bacterial social
behavior and offering density-dependent fitness advantages, expression of
virulence factors, and biofilm development in bacteria, it also plays a
crucial role in the behavior of eukaryotic host cells regulating various vital
functions. Moreover, as QS circuits often control virulence and biofilm, there
is a high interest in interfering with QS as a new strategy to overcome
infectious diseases and biofilm formation ([Amara et al.,
2011](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=classic#B1);
[Heeb et al., 2011](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?repor
t=classic#B26); [Jakobsen et al., 2013](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articl
es/PMC4071818/?report=classic#B31); [LaSarre and Federle, 2013](http://www.ncb
i.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4071818/?report=classic#B43)).

The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, patents,
copyrights, funding, payment, service or other activities or relationships
that might be perceived as an affecting the objectivity of this review.

We apologize to those colleagues whose work could not be cited owing to space
constraints. We thank our colleagues at University of Linkoping for joint
work, collaborations, insightful discussions and helpful suggestions, and
especially Professor Karl-Eric Magnusson, Professor Peter Konradsson, Dr. Lan
Bui, Dr. Maria Turkina, Dr. Thommie Karlsson, Dr. Augustas Pivorunas, Ms.
Farah Musse, Ms. Olena Yakymenko, Ms. Joanna Gradin, Ms. Susanna Bohman, Mr.
Risul Amin, and Ms. Andrea Molinas. We also thank Dr. Hans Blom and Professor
Hjalmar Brismar (Advanced Light Microscopy Group, SciLifeLab Stockholm,
Sweden). We recognize the help from Cayman Chemical (Ann Arbor, MI, USA) in
the design and synthesis of AHL probes according to our suggestions. The work
was supported by grants from the Swedish Research Council, the European
Science foundation (TraPPs Euromembrane project), Euro-BioImaging Proof-of
Concept Studies, the King Gustaf V 80 Year Foundation, Magnus Bergvalls
Foundation and the Faculty of Health Sciences, Linkoping University.

  * Amara N., Krom B. P., Kaufmann G. F., Meijler M. M. (2011). Macromolecular inhibition of quorum sensing: enzymes, antibodies, and beyond. _Chem. Rev._ 111 195-208 10.1021/cr100101c [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21087050)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1021%2Fcr100101c)]
  * Balda M. S., Matter K. (2008). Tight junctions at a glance. _J. Cell Sci._ 121(Pt22) 3677-368210.1242/jcs.023887 [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18987354)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1242%2Fjcs.023887)]
  * Balda M. S., Matter K. (2009). Tight junctions and the regulation of gene expression. _Biochim. Biophys. Acta_ 1788 761-76710.1016/j.bbamem.2008.11.024 [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19121284)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.bbamem.2008.11.024)]
  * Bensenor L. B., Kan H. M., Wang N., Wallrabe H., Davidson L. A., Cai Y., et al. (2007). IQGAP1 regulates cell motility by linking growth factor signaling to actin assembly. _J. Cell Sci._ 120(Pt 4) 658-66910.1242/jcs.03376 [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17264147)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1242%2Fjcs.03376)]
  * Brandt D. T., Grosse R. (2007). Get to grips: steering local actin dynamics with IQGAPs. _EMBO Rep._ 8 1019-102310.1038/sj.embor.7401089 [[PMC free article](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2247391/)] [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17972901)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1038%2Fsj.embor.7401089)]
  * Briggs M. W., Sacks D. B. (2003). IQGAP1 as signal integrator: Ca2+, calmodulin, Cdc42 and the cytoskeleton. _FEBS Lett._ 542 7-1110.1016/S0014-5793(03)00333-8 [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12729888)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016%2FS0014-5793(03)00333-8)]
  * Capaldo C. T., Farkas A. E., Nusrat A. (2014). Epithelial adhesive junctions. _F1000Prime Rep._ 6:1 10.12703/P6-1 [[PMC free article](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3883420/)] [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24592313)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.12703%2FP6-1)]
  * Chen F., Gao Y., Chen X., Yu Z., Li X. (2013). Quorum quenching enzymes and their application in degrading signal molecules to block quorum sensing-dependent infection. _Int. J. Mol. Sci._ 14 17477-17500 10.3390/ijms140917477 [[PMC free article](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3794736/)] [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24065091)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.3390%2Fijms140917477)]
  * Compan V., Baroja-Mazo A., Lopez-Castejon G., Gomez A. I., Martinez C. M., Angosto D., et al. (2012). Cell volume regulation modulates NLRP3 inflammasome activation. _Immunity_ 37 487-50010.1016/j.immuni.2012.06.013 [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22981536)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.immuni.2012.06.013)]
  * Cooley M. A., Whittall C., Rolph M. S. (2010). _Pseudomonas_ signal molecule 3-oxo-C12-homoserine lactone interferes with binding of rosiglitazone to human PPARgamma. _Microbes Infect._ 12 231-23710.1016/j.micinf.2009.12.009 [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20074659)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.micinf.2009.12.009)]
  * Czajkowski R., Jafra S. (2009). Quenching of acyl-homoserine lactone-dependent quorum sensing by enzymatic disruption of signal molecules. _Acta Biochim. Pol._ 56 1-16 [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19287806)]
  * Davis B., Jensen M. R., Williams P, O'Shea P. (2010). The interaction of N-acylhomoserine lactone quorum sensing signaling molecules with biological membranes: implications for inter-kingdom signaling. _PLoS ONE_ 5:e13522 10.1371/journal.pone.0013522 [[PMC free article](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2958149/)] [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20975958)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0013522)]
  * de Kievit T. R. (2009). Quorum sensing in _Pseudomonas aeruginosa_ biofilms. _Environ. Microbiol._ 11 279-28810.1111/j.1462-2920.2008.01792.x [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19196266)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1111%2Fj.1462-2920.2008.01792.x)]
  * Deziel E., Lepine F., Milot S., He J., Mindrinos M. N., Tompkins R. G., et al. (2004). Analysis of _Pseudomonas aeruginosa_ 4-hydroxy-2-alkylquinolines (HAQs) reveals a role for 4-hydroxy-2-heptylquinoline in cell-to-cell communication. _Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A._ 101 1339-134410.1073/pnas.0307694100 [[PMC free article](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC337054/)] [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/14739337)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1073%2Fpnas.0307694100)]
  * Diggle S. P., Matthijs S., Wright V. J., Fletcher M. P., Chhabra S. R., Lamont I. L., et al. (2007). The _Pseudomonas aeruginosa_ 4-quinolone signal molecules HHQ and PQS play multifunctional roles in quorum sensing and iron entrapment. _Chem. Biol._ 14 87-9610.1016/j.chembiol.2006.11.014 [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17254955)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.chembiol.2006.11.014)]
  * Dubinsky L., Delago A., Amara N., Krief P., Rayo J., Zor T., et al. (2013). Species selective diazirine positioning in tag-free photoactive quorum sensing probes. _Chem. Commun. (Camb.)_ 49 5826-5828 10.1039/c3cc43092h [[PMC free article](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3723129/)] [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23702727)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1039%2Fc3cc43092h)]
  * Dubinsky L., Jarosz L. M., Amara N., Krief P., Kravchenko V. V., Krom B. P., et al. (2009). Synthesis and validation of a probe to identify quorum sensing receptors. _Chem. Commun. (Camb.)_ 47 7378-7380 10.1039/b917507e [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20024234)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1039%2Fb917507e)]
  * Evers E. E., Zondag G. C., Malliri A., Price L. S., ten Klooster J. P., van der Kammen R. A., et al. (2000). Rho family proteins in cell adhesion and cell migration. _Eur. J. Cancer_ 36 1269-127410.1016/S0959-8049(00)00091-5 [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10882865)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016%2FS0959-8049(00)00091-5)]
  * Fazli M., Almblad H., Rybtke M. L., Givskov M., Eberl L., Tolker-Nielsen T. (2014). Regulation of biofilm formation in _Pseudomonas_ and _Burkholderia_ species. _Environ. Microbiol_. [Epub ahead of print]10.1111/1462-2920.12448 [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24592823)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1111%2F1462-2920.12448)]
  * Furuse M. (2010). Molecular basis of the core structure of tight junctions. _Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol._ 2:a002907 10.1101/cshperspect.a002907 [[PMC free article](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2827901/)] [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20182608)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1101%2Fcshperspect.a002907)]
  * Gambello M. J., Iglewski B. H. (1991). Cloning and characterization of the _Pseudomonas aeruginosa_ lasR gene, a transcriptional activator of elastase expression. _J. Bacteriol._ 173 3000-3009 [[PMC free article](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC207884/)] [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/1902216)]
  * Gambello M. J., Kaye S., Iglewski B. H. (1993). LasR of _Pseudomonas aeruginosa_ is a transcriptional activator of the alkaline protease gene (apr) and an enhancer of exotoxin A expression. _Infect. Immun._ 61 1180-1184 [[PMC free article](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC281346/)] [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8454322)]
  * Garner A. L., Yu J., Struss A. K., Lowery C. A., Zhu J., Kim S. K., et al. (2011). Synthesis of 'clickable' acylhomoserine lactone quorum sensing probes: unanticipated effects on mammalian cell activation. _Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett._ 21 2702-270510.1016/j.bmcl.2010.11.122 [[PMC free article](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3081916/)] [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21190852)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.bmcl.2010.11.122)]
  * Glucksam-Galnoy Y., Sananes R., Silberstein N., Krief P., Kravchenko V. V., Meijler M. M., et al. (2013). The bacterial quorum-sensing signal molecule N-3-oxo-dodecanoyl-L-homoserine lactone reciprocally modulates pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines in activated macrophages. _J. Immunol._ 191 337-34410.4049/jimmunol.1300368 [[PMC free article](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3691282/)] [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23720811)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.4049%2Fjimmunol.1300368)]
  * Gonzalez J. F., Venturi V. (2013). A novel widespread interkingdom signaling circuit. _Trends Plant Sci._ 18 167-17410.1016/j.tplants.2012.09.007 [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23089307)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.tplants.2012.09.007)]
  * Heeb S., Fletcher M. P., Chhabra S. R., Diggle S. P., Williams P., Camara M. (2011). Quinolones: from antibiotics to autoinducers. _FEMS Microbiol. Rev._ 35 247-27410.1111/j.1574-6976.2010.00247.x [[PMC free article](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3053476/)] [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20738404)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1111%2Fj.1574-6976.2010.00247.x)]
  * Hoffmann E. K., Lambert I. H., Pedersen S. F. (2009). Physiology of cell volume regulation in vertebrates. _Physiol. Rev._ 89 193-27710.1152/physrev.00037.2007 [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19126758)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1152%2Fphysrev.00037.2007)]
  * Ivanov A. I., Parkos C. A., Nusrat A. (2010). Cytoskeletal regulation of epithelial barrier function during inflammation. _Am. J. Pathol._ 177 512-52410.2353/ajpath.2010.100168 [[PMC free article](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2913378/)] [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20581053)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.2353%2Fajpath.2010.100168)]
  * Ivanova H., Vervliet T., Missiaen L., Parys J. B., De Smedt H., Bultynck G. (2014). Inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor-isoform diversity in cell death and survival. _Biochim. Biophys. Acta_ [Epub ahead of print]10.1016/j.bbamcr.2014.03.007 [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24642269)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.bbamcr.2014.03.007)]
  * Jahoor A., Patel R., Bryan A., Do C., Krier J., Watters C., et al. (2008). Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors mediate host cell proinflammatory responses to _Pseudomonas aeruginosa_ autoinducer. _J. Bacteriol._ 190 4408-441510.1128/JB.01444-07 [[PMC free article](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2446782/)] [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18178738)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1128%2FJB.01444-07)]
  * Jakobsen T. H., Bjarnsholt T., Jensen P. O., Givskov M., Hoiby N. (2013). Targeting quorum sensing in _Pseudomonas aeruginosa_ biofilms: current and emerging inhibitors. _Future Microbiol._ 8 901-921 10.2217/fmb.13.57 [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23841636)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.2217%2Ffmb.13.57)]
  * Jarosz L. M., Ovchinnikova E. S., Meijler M. M., Krom B. P. (2011). Microbial spy games and host response: roles of a _Pseudomonas aeruginosa_ small molecule in communication with other species. _PLoS Pathog._ 7:e1002312 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002312 [[PMC free article](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3219704/)] [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22114549)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1371%2Fjournal.ppat.1002312)]
  * Karlsson T., Bolshakova A., Magalhaes M. A., Loitto V. M., Magnusson K. E. (2013a). Fluxes of water through aquaporin 9 weaken membrane-cytoskeleton anchorage and promote formation of membrane protrusions. _PLoS ONE_ 8:e59901 10.1371/journal.pone.0059901 [[PMC free article](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3616121/)] [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23573219)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0059901)]
  * Karlsson T., Lagerholm B. C., Vikstrom E., Loitto V. M., Magnusson K. E. (2013b). Water fluxes through aquaporin-9 prime epithelial cells for rapid wound healing. _Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun._ 430 993-99810.1016/j.bbrc.2012.11.125 [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23261438)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.bbrc.2012.11.125)]
  * Karlsson T., Glogauer M., Ellen R. P., Loitto V. M., Magnusson K. E., Magalhaes M. A. (2011). Aquaporin 9 phosphorylation mediates membrane localization and neutrophil polarization. _J. Leukoc. Biol._ 90 963-97310.1189/jlb.0910540 [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21873454)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1189%2Fjlb.0910540)]
  * Karlsson T., Musse F., Magnusson K. E., Vikstrom E. (2012a). N-Acylhomoserine lactones are potent neutrophil chemoattractants that act via calcium mobilization and actin remodeling. _J. Leukoc. Biol._ 91 15-2610.1189/jlb.0111034 [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21807742)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1189%2Fjlb.0111034)]
  * Karlsson T., Turkina M. V., Yakymenko O., Magnusson K. E., Vikstrom E. (2012b). The _Pseudomonas aeruginosa_ N-acylhomoserine lactone quorum sensing molecules target IQGAP1 and modulate epithelial cell migration. _PLoS Pathog._ 8:e1002953 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002953 [[PMC free article](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3469656/)] [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23071436)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1371%2Fjournal.ppat.1002953)]
  * Kjoller L., Hall A. (1999). Signaling to Rho GTPases. _Exp. Cell Res._ 253 166-17910.1006/excr.1999.4674 [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10579921)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1006%2Fexcr.1999.4674)]
  * Kravchenko V. V., Kaufmann G. F., Mathison J. C., Scott D. A., Katz A. Z., Grauer D. C., et al. (2008). Modulation of gene expression via disruption of NF-kappaB signaling by a bacterial small molecule. _Science_ 321 259-26310.1126/science.1156499 [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18566250)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1126%2Fscience.1156499)]
  * Kravchenko V. V., Kaufmann G. F., Mathison J. C., Scott D. A., Katz A. Z., Wood M. R., et al. (2006). N-(3-oxo-acyl)homoserine lactones signal cell activation through a mechanism distinct from the canonical pathogen-associated molecular pattern recognition receptor pathways. _J. Biol. Chem._ 281 28822-2883010.1074/jbc.M606613200 [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16893899)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1074%2Fjbc.M606613200)]
  * Kwon T., Kwon D. Y., Chun J., Kim J. H., Kang S. S. (2000). Akt protein kinase inhibits Rac1-GTP binding through phosphorylation at serine 71 of Rac1. _J. Biol. Chem._ 275 423-42810.1074/jbc.275.1.423 [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10617634)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1074%2Fjbc.275.1.423)]
  * Lange K., Gartzke J. (2006). F-actin-based Ca signaling-a critical comparison with the current concept of Ca signaling. _J. Cell. Physiol._ 209 270-28710.1002/jcp.20717 [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16823881)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1002%2Fjcp.20717)]
  * LaSarre B., Federle M. J. (2013). Exploiting quorum sensing to confuse bacterial pathogens. _Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev._ 77 73-11110.1128/MMBR.00046-12 [[PMC free article](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3591984/)] [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23471618)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1128%2FMMBR.00046-12)]
  * Latifi A., Foglino M., Tanaka K., Williams P., Lazdunski A. (1996). A hierarchical quorum-sensing cascade in _Pseudomonas aeruginosa_ links the transcriptional activators LasR and RhIR (VsmR) to expression of the stationary-phase sigma factor RpoS. _Mol. Microbiol._ 21 1137-114610.1046/j.1365-2958.1996.00063.x [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8898383)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1046%2Fj.1365-2958.1996.00063.x)]
  * Ledgham F., Ventre I., Soscia C., Foglino M., Sturgis J. N., Lazdunski A. (2003). Interactions of the quorum sensing regulator QscR: interaction with itself and the other regulators of _Pseudomonas aeruginosa_ LasR and RhlR. _Mol. Microbiol._ 48 199-21010.1046/j.1365-2958.2003.03423.x [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12657055)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1046%2Fj.1365-2958.2003.03423.x)]
  * Lintz M. J., Oinuma K., Wysoczynski C. L., Greenberg E. P., Churchill M. E. (2011). Crystal structure of QscR, a _Pseudomonas aeruginosa_ quorum sensing signal receptor. _Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A._ 108 15763-1576810.1073/pnas.1112398108 [[PMC free article](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3179110/)] [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21911405)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1073%2Fpnas.1112398108)]
  * Mayer M. L., Sheridan J. A., Blohmke C. J., Turvey S. E., Hancock R. E. (2011). The _Pseudomonas aeruginosa_ autoinducer 3O-C12 homoserine lactone provokes hyperinflammatory responses from cystic fibrosis airway epithelial cells. _PLoS ONE_ 6:e16246 10.1371/journal.pone.0016246 [[PMC free article](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3031552/)] [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21305014)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0016246)]
  * Mesko B., Poliska S., Szegedi A., Szekanecz Z., Palatka K., Papp M., et al. (2010). Peripheral blood gene expression patterns discriminate among chronic inflammatory diseases and healthy controls and identify novel targets. _BMC Med. Genomics_ 3:15 10.1186/1755-8794-3-15 [[PMC free article](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2874757/)] [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20444268)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1186%2F1755-8794-3-15)]
  * More M. I., Finger L. D., Stryker J. L., Fuqua C., Eberhard A., Winans S. C. (1996). Enzymatic synthesis of a quorum-sensing autoinducer through use of defined substrates. _Science_ 272 1655-165810.1126/science.272.5268.1655 [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8658141)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1126%2Fscience.272.5268.1655)]
  * Noritake J., Fukata M., Sato K., Nakagawa M., Watanabe T., Izumi N., et al. (2004). Positive role of IQGAP1, an effector of Rac1, in actin-meshwork formation at sites of cell-cell contact. _Mol. Biol. Cell_ 15 1065-107610.1091/mbc.E03-08-0582 [[PMC free article](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC363077/)] [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/14699063)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1091%2Fmbc.E03-08-0582)]
  * Noritake J., Watanabe T., Sato K., Wang S., Kaibuchi K. (2005). IQGAP1: a key regulator of adhesion and migration. _J. Cell Sci._ 118(Pt 10) 2085-209210.1242/jcs.02379 [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15890984)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1242%2Fjcs.02379)]
  * Ochsner U. A., Koch A. K., Fiechter A., Reiser J. (1994). Isolation and characterization of a regulatory gene affecting rhamnolipid biosurfactant synthesis in _Pseudomonas aeruginosa_. _J. Bacteriol._ 176 2044-2054 [[PMC free article](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC205310/)] [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8144472)]
  * Oinuma K., Greenberg E. P. (2011). Acyl-homoserine lactone binding to and stability of the orphan _Pseudomonas aeruginosa_ quorum-sensing signal receptor QscR. _J. Bacteriol._ 193 421-42810.1128/JB.01041-10 [[PMC free article](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3019841/)] [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21097632)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1128%2FJB.01041-10)]
  * Pacheco A. R., Sperandio V. (2009). Inter-kingdom signaling: chemical language between bacteria and host. _Curr. Opin. Microbiol._ 12 192-19810.1016/j.mib.2009.01.006 [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19318290)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.mib.2009.01.006)]
  * Parsek M. R., Val D. L., Hanzelka B. L., Cronan J. E., Jr., Greenberg E. P. (1999). Acyl homoserine-lactone quorum-sensing signal generation. _Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A._ 96 4360-436510.1073/pnas.96.8.4360 [[PMC free article](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC16337/)] [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10200267)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1073%2Fpnas.96.8.4360)]
  * Pearson J. P., Passador L., Iglewski B. H., Greenberg E. P. (1995). A second N-acylhomoserine lactone signal produced by _Pseudomonas aeruginosa_. _Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A._ 92 1490-149410.1073/pnas.92.5.1490 [[PMC free article](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC42545/)] [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7878006)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1073%2Fpnas.92.5.1490)]
  * Praneenararat T., Beary T. M., Breitbach A. S., Blackwell H. E. (2011). Synthesis and application of an N-acylated l-homoserine lactone derivatized affinity matrix for the isolation of quorum sensing signal receptors. _Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett._ 21 5054-505710.1016/j.bmcl.2011.04.062 [[PMC free article](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3513337/)] [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21592793)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.bmcl.2011.04.062)]
  * Ritchie A. J., Whittall C., Lazenby J. J., Chhabra S. R., Pritchard D. I., Cooley M. A. (2007). The immunomodulatory _Pseudomonas aeruginosa_ signalling molecule N-(3-oxododecanoyl)-L-homoserine lactone enters mammalian cells in an unregulated fashion. _Immunol. Cell Biol._ 85 596-60210.1038/sj.icb.7100090 [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17607318)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1038%2Fsj.icb.7100090)]
  * Rodgers L. S., Fanning A. S. (2011). Regulation of epithelial permeability by the actin cytoskeleton. _Cytoskeleton (Hoboken)_ 68 653-660 10.1002/cm.20547 [[PMC free article](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3310364/)] [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22083950)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1002%2Fcm.20547)]
  * Rutherford S. T., Bassler B. L. (2012). Bacterial quorum sensing: its role in virulence and possibilities for its control. _Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Med_ 2:a012427 10.1101/cshperspect.a012427 [[PMC free article](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3543102/)] [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23125205)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1101%2Fcshperspect.a012427)]
  * Schuster M., Greenberg E. P. (2006). A network of networks: quorum-sensing gene regulation in _Pseudomonas aeruginosa_. _Int. J. Med. Microbiol._ 296 73-8110.1016/j.ijmm.2006.01.036 [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16476569)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.ijmm.2006.01.036)]
  * Schuster M., Lostroh C. P., Ogi T., Greenberg E. P. (2003). Identification, timing, and signal specificity of _Pseudomonas aeruginosa_ quorum-controlled genes: a transcriptome analysis. _J. Bacteriol._ 185 2066-207910.1128/JB.185.7.2066-2079.2003 [[PMC free article](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC151497/)] [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12644476)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1128%2FJB.185.7.2066-2079.2003)]
  * Schuster M., Sexton D. J., Diggle S. P., Greenberg E. P. (2013). Acyl-homoserine lactone quorum sensing: from evolution to application. _Annu. Rev. Microbiol._ 67 43-6310.1146/annurev-micro-092412-155635 [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23682605)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1146%2Fannurev-micro-092412-155635)]
  * Seed P. C., Passador L., Iglewski B. H. (1995). Activation of the _Pseudomonas aeruginosa_ lasI gene by LasR and the _Pseudomonas_ autoinducer PAI: an autoinduction regulatory hierarchy. _J. Bacteriol._ 177 654-659 [[PMC free article](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC176640/)] [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7836299)]
  * Shiner E. K., Reddy S., Timmons C., Li G., Williams S. C., Rumbaugh K. P. (2004). Construction of a bacterial autoinducer detection system in mammalian cells. _Biol. Proced. Online_ 6 268-276 10.1251/bpo98 [[PMC free article](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC539822/)] [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15630481)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1251%2Fbpo98)]
  * Shiner E. K., Terentyev D., Bryan A., Sennoune S., Martinez-Zaguilan R., Li G., et al. (2006). _Pseudomonas aeruginosa_ autoinducer modulates host cell responses through calcium signalling. _Cell Microbiol._ 8 1601-161010.1111/j.1462-5822.2006.00734.x [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16984415)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1111%2Fj.1462-5822.2006.00734.x)]
  * Smith R. S., Kelly R., Iglewski B. H., Phipps R. P. (2002). The _Pseudomonas_ autoinducer N-(3-oxododecanoyl) homoserine lactone induces cyclooxygenase-2 and prostaglandin E2 production in human lung fibroblasts: implications for inflammation. _J. Immunol._ 169 2636-264210.4049/jimmunol.169.5.2636 [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12193735)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.4049%2Fjimmunol.169.5.2636)]
  * Sturm A., Dignass A. U. (2008). Epithelial restitution and wound healing in inflammatory bowel disease. _World J. Gastroenterol._ 14 348-353 10.3748/wjg.14.348 [[PMC free article](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2679124/)] [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18200658)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.3748%2Fwjg.14.348)]
  * Swart-Mataraza J. M., Li Z., Sacks D. B. (2002). IQGAP1 is a component of Cdc42 signaling to the cytoskeleton. _J. Biol. Chem._ 277 24753-2476310.1074/jbc.M111165200 [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11948177)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1074%2Fjbc.M111165200)]
  * Tashiro Y., Yawata Y., Toyofuku M., Uchiyama H., Nomura N. (2013). Interspecies interaction between _Pseudomonas aeruginosa_ and other microorganisms. _Microbes Environ._ 28 13-24 10.1264/jsme2.ME12167 [[PMC free article](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4070684/)] [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23363620)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1264%2Fjsme2.ME12167)]
  * Teplitski M., Mathesius U., Rumbaugh K. P. (2011). Perception and degradation of N-acyl homoserine lactone quorum sensing signals by mammalian and plant cells. _Chem. Rev._ 111 100-116 10.1021/cr100045m [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20536120)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1021%2Fcr100045m)]
  * Toder D. S., Gambello M. J., Iglewski B. H. (1991). _Pseudomonas aeruginosa_ LasA: a second elastase under the transcriptional control of lasR. _Mol. Microbiol._ 5 2003-201010.1111/j.1365-2958.1991.tb00822.x [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/1766376)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1111%2Fj.1365-2958.1991.tb00822.x)]
  * Van Itallie C. M., Anderson J. M. (2004). The molecular physiology of tight junction pores. _Physiology (Bethesda)_ 19 331-33810.1152/physiol.00027.2004 [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15546850)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1152%2Fphysiol.00027.2004)]
  * Vandenbroucke E., Mehta D., Minshall R., Malik A. B. (2008). Regulation of endothelial junctional permeability. _Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci._ 1123 134-14510.1196/annals.1420.016 [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18375586)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1196%2Fannals.1420.016)]
  * Varani J. (2011). Calcium, calcium-sensing receptor and growth control in the colonic mucosa. _Histol. Histopathol._ 26 769-779 [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21472691)]
  * Vikstrom E., Bui L., Konradsson P., Magnusson K. E. (2009). The junctional integrity of epithelial cells is modulated by _Pseudomonas aeruginosa_ quorum sensing molecule through phosphorylation-dependent mechanisms. _Exp. Cell Res._ 315 313-32610.1016/j.yexcr.2008.10.044 [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19038248)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.yexcr.2008.10.044)]
  * Vikstrom E., Bui L., Konradsson P., Magnusson K. E. (2010). Role of calcium signalling and phosphorylations in disruption of the epithelial junctions by _Pseudomonas aeruginosa_ quorum sensing molecule. _Eur. J. Cell Biol._ 89 584-59710.1016/j.ejcb.2010.03.002 [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20434232)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.ejcb.2010.03.002)]
  * Vikstrom E., Magnusson K. E., Pivoriunas A. (2005). The _Pseudomonas aeruginosa_ quorum-sensing molecule N-(3-oxododecanoyl)-L-homoserine lactone stimulates phagocytic activity in human macrophages through the p38 MAPK pathway. _Microbes Infect._ 7 1512-151810.1016/j.micinf.2005.05.012 [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16039899)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.micinf.2005.05.012)]
  * Vikstrom E., Tafazoli F., Magnusson K. E. (2006). _Pseudomonas aeruginosa_ quorum sensing molecule N-(3 oxododecanoyl)-l-homoserine lactone disrupts epithelial barrier integrity of Caco-2 cells. _FEBS Lett._ 580 6921-692810.1016/j.febslet.2006.11.057 [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17157842)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.febslet.2006.11.057)]
  * Wagner V. E., Iglewski B. H. (2008). P. aeruginosa Biofilms in CF Infection. _Clin. Rev. Allergy Immunol._ 35 124-13410.1007/s12016-008-8079-9 [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18509765)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1007%2Fs12016-008-8079-9)]
  * Wang H., Jin R., Tian P., Zhuo Z. (2009). Enhanced expression of aquaporin-9 in rat brain edema induced by bacterial lipopolysaccharides. _J. Huazhong Univ. Sci. Technolog. Med. Sci._ 29 150-15510.1007/s11596-009-0203-4 [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19399395)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1007%2Fs11596-009-0203-4)]
  * Wennerberg K., Der C. J. (2004). Rho-family GTPases: it's not only Rac and Rho (and I like it). _J. Cell Sci._ 117(Pt 8) 1301-131210.1242/jcs.01118 [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15020670)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1242%2Fjcs.01118)]
  * Williams P., Camara M. (2009). Quorum sensing and environmental adaptation in _Pseudomonas aeruginosa_: a tale of regulatory networks and multifunctional signal molecules. _Curr. Opin. Microbiol._ 12 182-19110.1016/j.mib.2009.01.005 [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19249239)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.mib.2009.01.005)]
  * Xiao G., He J., Rahme L. G. (2006). Mutation analysis of the _Pseudomonas aeruginosa_ mvfR and pqsABCDE gene promoters demonstrates complex quorum-sensing circuitry. _Microbiology_ 152(Pt 6) 1679-168610.1099/mic.0.28605-0 [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16735731)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1099%2Fmic.0.28605-0)]
  * Zen K., Parkos C. A. (2003). Leukocyte-epithelial interactions. _Curr. Opin. Cell Biol._ 15 557-56410.1016/S0955-0674(03)00103-0 [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/14519390)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016%2FS0955-0674(03)00103-0)]
  * Zimmermann S., Wagner C., Muller W., Brenner-Weiss G., Hug F., Prior B., et al. (2006). Induction of neutrophil chemotaxis by the quorum-sensing molecule N-(3-oxododecanoyl)-L-homoserine lactone. _Infect. Immun_. 74 5687-5692 10.1128/IAI.01940-05 [[PMC free article](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1594900/)] [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16988244)] [[Cross Ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1128%2FIAI.01940-05)]

Articles from Frontiers in Plant Science are provided here courtesy of
**Frontiers Media SA**
